# DC1001

<table>
<tr>
  <td>TypeName</td>
  <td>DC1001UsingNamespaceStatementsMustNotReferenceDisallowedNamespaces</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>CheckId</td>
  <td>DC1001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>Category</td>
  <td>Readability Rules</td>
</tr>
</table>

## Cause

A using namespace statement refers a namespace that is configured as disallowed.

## Rule description

A violation of this rule occurs when a using namespace statement refers to a namespace that has been configured as disallowed (for configuration details, see below).

This rule supports a coding style that is uncommon and/or controversial. In short, it says to avoid using namespace statements for specific namespaces, typically your own namespaces. The rationale is that you should structure your code in a way such that referring your own code without using namespace statements feels natural (and even better) than the more traditional approach.

A little history: a language like C does not have namespaces as a first class citizen. Newer languages like C# do. However, a common style in C# is to put things into namespaces and shortly after, when referring your own code, you short-circuit the namespaces with using namespace statements. This typically means that an account id class in namespace `Account` will be named `AccountId` since when used in namespace `Transaction` that class will be referred to with just `AccountId`.

What is wrong with this approach? A number of things:

- The full name of `AccountId` is `Account.AccountId`, which contains redundant information (the term `Account` is present twice).
- When using `AccountId` in namespace `Account` you already know that you are in an account context, thus it is more verbose to have to write (and read) `AccountId`.

If instead the class was just named `Id` (and no using namespace statements are used), your code gets the following properties:

- The full name `Account.Id` does not contain redundant information.
- When using `Id` in namespace `Account` your code gets easier to read as it does not contain prefixes existing solely to support short-circuiting of namespaces.
- When using `Account.Id` in namespace `Transaction` you are confident that this is the id class from the `Account` namespace since you know you are not short-circuiting namespaces.

Another benefit of this rule is that it to some degree enforces high coherence and low coupling, since referring to types in the current namespace is short and easy (high coherence), whereas referring to types located far away is more verbose and tedious (low coupling).

It takes a little getting used to this style of coding. Old habits might have to be unlearned. One such habit is to place all enums in one folder in namespace `Enums`, all DTOs in another folder in namespace `DTOs`, etc. Instead, think in terms of namespaces inspired by your domain like `Account` and `Transaction` and place enums and DTOs in the appropriate namespaces.

In general, always look at the full name of a type and see whether all parts makes sense. Remove every non-essential token, like Base, Common, Framework, Platform, Shared, Tools, Utility, etc. Also try to remove grouping tokens, typically tokens in plural sense like `Controllers`. Remove all redundancy. With some care you will end up with some well-considered, context-aware short names that spread into an appropriate set of namespaces.

## Limitations

This is not a universal approach that works everywhere. The recommended approach is to disallow short-circuiting your own namespaces, and allow short-circuiting 3rd party namespaces including the System namespace. A common approach is to disallow the common ancestor namespace of all root namespaces for all project files within a solution.

The advice in this rule partly conflicts with at least one of the recommendations in Microsofts guidelines for [Names of Namespaces](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/design-guidelines/names-of-namespaces) that says *"DO NOT introduce generic type names such as Element, Node, Log, and Message"*. When namespaces are no longer short-circuited, this recommendation almost turns into the opposite advice. However, if you are a 3rd party library provider and hence your consumers short-circuit your namespaces, that recommendation still makes sense.

## How to fix violations

Remove the using statement and use fully (or partially) qualified names. For accessing extension methods, use static using statements.

## Configuration

This rule must be configured with a list of disallowed namespaces. The list must be specified as a single value with entries separated by commas in one of the following ways:

- In file **.globalconfig** with a line like:
 
```
  dotnet_diagnostic.DC1001_NamespacePrefixes=MyNamespace1,MyNamespace2
```

- As a property in an MSBuild file like:

```
  <PropertyGroup>
    <DC1001_NamespacePrefixes>MyNamespace1,MyNamespace2</DC1001_NamespacePrefixes>
  </PropertyGroup>
  <ItemGroup>
    <CompilerVisibleProperty Include="DC1001_NamespacePrefixes" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

If the rule is not configured, [rule DC1004](./DC1004.md) will report that the rule must be configured. If no namespaces should be disallowed, just specify a value of `-`.

## ReSharper configuration

ReSharper can be configured to either short-circuit or not short-circuit namespaces by setting option *Prefer Fully Qualified References*. The recommended setting is to turn the option off.

To avoid having your own namespaces short-circuited, for each disallowed namespace add an entry to list *Exclude the following types/members from import features* in section *Type Import*, e.g. if namespace `MyNamespace1` is disallowed, add entry `MyNamespace1.*`.
