# DC1001

<table>
<tr>
  <td>TypeName</td>
  <td>DC1001CodeMustNotContainUsingNamespaceStatementsForDisallowedNamespaces</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>CheckId</td>
  <td>DC1001</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>Category</td>
  <td>Readability Rules</td>
</tr>
</table>

## Cause

A using namespace statement refers a namespace that is configured as disallowed.

> The disallowed namespaces must be specified by setting property `dotnet_diagnostic.DC1001.namespace_prefixes` in **.globalconfig** to a comma-separated list of namespace prefixes. If the property is not set, the rule has no effect.

## Rule description

A violation of this rule occurs when a using namespace statement refers to a namespace that has been configured as disallowed.

This rule supports a coding style that is uncommon and/or controversial. In short, it says to avoid using namespace statements for specific namespaces, typically your own namespaces. The rationale is that you should structure your code in a way such that referring your own code without using namespace statements feels natural (and even better) than the more traditional approach.

A little history: a language like C does not have namespaces as a first class citizen. Newer languages like C# do. However, a common style in C# is to put things into namespaces and shortly after when referring your own code, you shortcircuit the namespaces with using namespace statements. This typically means that an account id class in namespace `Account` will be named `AccountId` since when used in namespace `Transaction` that class will be referred to with just `AccountId`.

What is wrong with this approach? A number of things:

- The full name of `AccountId` is `Account.AccountId`, which contains redundant information (the term `Account` is present twice).
- When using `AccountId` in namespace `Account` you already know that you are in an account context, thus it is more verbose to have to write `AccountId`.

If instead the class was just named `Id` (and no using namespace statements are used), your code gets the following properties:

- The full name `Account.Id` does not contain redundant information.
- When using `Id` in namespace `Account` your code gets easier to read as it does not contain prefixes existing solely to support shortcircuiting of namespaces.
- When using `Account.Id` in namespace `Transaction` you are confident that this is the id class from the `Account` namespace since you know you are not shortcircuiting namespaces.

Another benefit of this rule is that it to some degree enforces high coherence and low coupling, since referring to types in the current namespace is short and easy (high coherence), whereas referring to types located far away is more verbose and tedious (low coupling).

It takes a little getting used to this style of coding. Old habits might have to be unlearned. One such habit is to place all enums in one folder in namespace `Enums`, all DTOs in another folder in namespace `DTOs`, etc. Instead, think in terms of namespaces inspired by your domain like `Account` and `Transaction` and place enums and DTOs in the appropriate namespaces.

In general, always look at the full name of a type and see whether all parts makes sense. Remove every non-essential token, like Base, Common, Framework, Platform, Shared, Tools, Utility, etc. Also try to remove grouping tokens, typically tokens in plural sense like `Controllers`. Remove all redundancy. With some care you will end up with some well-considered, context-aware short names that spread into an appropriate set of namespaces.

This is not a universal approach that works everywhere. The recommended approach is to disallow short-circuiting your own namespaces, and allow short-circuiting 3rd party namespaces including the System namespace. If you are using ReSharper, you may find yourself in a dilemma as ReSharper can be set up to either short-circuit or not to short-circuiting namespaces (the option is named Prefer Fully Qualified References); so either ReSharper will short-circuit too much or too little...

## How to fix violations

Remove the using statement and use fully (or partially) qualified names.